RAII-V3 - automated resource management (#689)
terralang/terra: docs/raii.md

3. **Copy construction**
4. **Move assignment**
5. **Move construction**

However, we use a simpler model compared to C++11 with convenient and efficient defaults at the expense of some flexibility. For example, **rvalue references** (introduced in C++11) are not supported in Terra. The implementation is much closer to that of Rust.

### Core Concepts:
Compiler support is provided for the following methods:
| Feature                                      | Description                                                                 |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `A.methods.__init(self : &A)`                  | Optionally user-implemented, autogenerated with memory zero-initialized. |
| `A.methods.__dtor(self : &A)`                  | User-implemented, autogenerated for aggregates with managed fields.                |
| `(A or B).methods.__copy(from : &A, to : &B)`  | User-implemented, autogenerated for aggregates with copyable fields.               |
| `A.methods.__move(from : &A, to : &A)`         | Auto-generated to handle move semantics for resource transfer.        |

> | `__move__`                                     | Prefer `__move` over `__copy` for efficient resource transfer.               |

Reviewer: It occurs to me that we could make `move` be a keyword that only becomes available once the user adds `require "terralibext"` to their code. That would make it opt-in to preserve backwards compatibility for now, and we could keep it that way for a few releases to give people time to migrate over before making it a default. Not sure about the engineering effort.

> | `__move__`                                     | Prefer `__move` over `__copy` for efficient resource transfer.               |

Author: Certainly. I also prefer something without the double underscores. Let's pick this up once we agree on the design and the rest of the implementation.

| `__handle__`                                   | Get a handle to a managed object without transferring ownership. Performs an allocation.             |

These methods facilitate the implementation of smart containers and pointers, such as `std::string`, `std::vector` and `std::unique_ptr`, `std::shared_ptr` in C++.

#### Managed types
A struct is managed if it implements `__dtor`. Managed types require explicit resource cleanup (e.g., freeing heap memory). Without `__dtor`, a type behaves as a regular stack-allocated object with no special management.

#### Copyable types
A type is copyable if:
1. It is a primitive type (e.g., int, double) or a simd vector type or a function pointer, which are all trivially copyable by default.
2. An unmanaged struct with trivially copyable fields.
3. It is a managed struct with a `__copy` method, either:
    * User-defined;

>     * Auto-generated for aggregates where all fields are copyable and at least one is a managed type.

Reviewer: I guess I'm not sure why `Vector` being managed matters. As far as I understand:

 * If all fields are copyable, a `__copy` method will be autogenerated.
 * If at least one field is not copyable, a `__copy` method cannot be autogenerated (but the user could still manually implement it).

While there are sub-cases of copyable, they are subsumed by the induction, so I think it's more confusing rather than less to list those?

4. An array with an element type that is trivially copyable or uses `__copy`.

It's easier to remember the types that are not copyable:
1. It is a pointer type, excluding function pointers.
2. It is a managed struct type that does not implement a `__copy` method.

#### Movable types

> Unmanaged types are generally moveable but just invoke a memcopy. A managed type is movable if it can be transferred via a move. Key rules:

Author: Yes, it actually calls `memcpy`. 

In an earlier implementation I would recursively move all fields. This was needed because I allowed user-implemented `__move`'s.

The current memory-model is simpler and does not allow the user to overload the `__move` method. Calling `memcpy` is consistent with our current memory model, it leads to a simpler implementation and is also more efficient.

> Unmanaged types are generally moveable but just invoke a memcopy. A managed type is movable if it can be transferred via a move. Key rules:

Reviewer: I think this is a point worth making explicitly in the design document; I'm not sure I understood that from my first pass.

And if it's literally just `memcpy`, let's just call it as such in the document.

1. All managed types (those with `__dtor`) are movable by default.

> 2. A type `T` can be made immovable by deleting the (autogenerated) `__move` method.

Author: I'll include the dash everywhere

#### L-Values, R-Values, and B-Values
* L-Values: Values explicitly allocated with a var statement (e.g., `var x : T` or `var x = ...`). They represent named, persistent objects with a defined lifetime.
* R-Values: Temporary objects, typically resulting from function calls. They are short-lived and exist only within their expression.
* B-Values: Reference objects (`&T`), enabling borrowing. They allow the caller to retain ownership while the callee operates on the resource without transferring it.

#### Passing by value or by reference
Passing managed objects to functions or in an assignment can be done in two ways:
1. By value: Transfers ownership to the receiver.
    - L-values: Use the `__copy` method if defined, duplicating the resource. If `__copy` is not defined, or the `__move__` directive, e.g. `__move__(a)`, is used then ownership is transferred via the (autogenerated) `__move`. 
    - R-Values: Always transfer ownership using the (autogenerated) `__move`.

> 2. By Reference (B-Values): Grants temporary access via `&T`. No ownership transfer occurs; the original owner retains responsibility for cleanup via `__dtor`.

Author: I'll update to lowercase

#### Planned safety features
The single-ownership model enables compile-time verification of resource safety for sequential and parallel programs. The following enhancements are planned to strengthen this model:

1. **Initialization Tracking:**
    - Tracks variable initialization at compile time.
    - Flags use of uninitialized variables (e.g., after a move) as compile errors.
    - Skips `__dtor` for uninitialized objects, improving safety and efficiency.

2. **Constant References (`const&`):** 
    - Enforces read-only access (`const& T`) recursively at compile time.
    - Allows safe, unsynchronized sharing in parallel programs.

> ### Design Overview

Author: Where do you want this to go exactly?

> ### Design Overview

Reviewer: Right. I think the Design Overview subsection could be moved up, perhaps even as high up as Scope-Bound Resource Management (RAII) (below the Examples of Resources Managed via RAII subsection).

> ### Design Overview

Author: I will do that

* No Breaking Changes: This implementation does not introduce breaking changes to existing Terra code. No new keywords are required, ensuring that existing syntax remains compatible.
* Type Checking Integration: These methods are introduced during the type-checking phase (handled in terralib.lua). They can be implemented as either macros or Terra functions.
* Composability: The implementation follows simple, consistent rules that ensure smooth compatibility with existing Terra syntax for construction, casting, and function returns.
* Heap resources: Heap resources are allocated and deallocated using standard C functions like malloc and free, leaving memory allocation in the hands of the programmer. The idea here is that remaining functionality, such as allocators, are implemented as libraries.

---

## Details about Implementation with Examples
A managed type is one that implements at least `__dtor` and optionally `__init` and `__copy` or, by induction, has fields or subfields that are of a managed type. In the following we assume `struct A` is a managed type.

> To enable RAII, import the library */lib/terralibext.t* using

Author: Good idea. I've added a disclaimer.

```terra
require "terralibext"
```
The compiler only checks for `__init`, `__dtor` and `__copy` in case this library is loaded.

### Object initialization
`__init` is used to initialize managed variables:
```
A.methods.__init(self : &A)
```
The compiler checks for an `__init` method in any variable definition statement, without explicit initializer, and emits the call right after the variable definition, e.g.
```
var a : A
a:__init()    --generated by compiler

> ```

Author: In case of managed types, `__init` with zero initialization will be auto-generated if it is not user-implemented. For non-managed types, an `__init` will never be auto-generated.

> ```

Author: This is the added text:

"""
Managed types, like `A`, alsways invoke a call to `__init`. If `A.methods.__init` is not implemented then the method will be auto-generated with zero-initialization of all fields. In contrast, non-managed struct types (i.e. those that don't implement `__dtor`) only schedule a call to `__init` in case `__init` is user-implemented.
"""

#### Array initialization
If you have an array with an element type that is managed and implements a (autogenerated) `__init` method, then the compiler will schedule an initializer call function that loops over the entries in the array and initializes the elements one-by-one.

### Copy assignment / construction
`__copy` enables specialized copy-assignment and, combined with `__init`, copy construction. `__copy` takes two arguments, which can be different, as long as one of them is a managed type, e.g.
```
A.metamethods.__copy(from : &A, to : &B)
```
and / or
```
A.metamethods.__copy(from : &B, to : &A)
```
If `a : A` is a managed type, then the compiler will replace a regular assignment by a call to the implemented `__copy` method
```
b = a   ---->   A.methods.__copy(&a, &b) 
```
or 
```
a = b   ---->   A.methods.__copy(&b, &a)
```

> `__copy` can be a (overloaded) terra function or a macro.

Author: I've added another sub-section on this topic.

#### Call prioritization
If both `A` and `B` implement their own `__copy` method then the compiler will prioritize the method implementation associated with the left-hand-side in the assignment. Hence, for the assignment
```
a = b
```
where `a : A` and `b : B`, the compiler will look for all available implementations from the various options:
* `A.methods.__copy(from : &B, to: &A)` is a regular method
* `B.methods.__copy(from : &B, to: &A)` is a regular method
* `A.methods.__copy(from, to)` is a macro
* `B.methods.__copy(from, to)` is a macro
* `A.methods.__copy(from, to)` is an overloaded method
* `B.methods.__copy(from, to)` is an overloaded method
and will prioritize implementations associated with the type of the left-hand-side `A`. Normal casting rules apply to regular and overloaded methods, which means that the compiler will try to cast the arguments if they are not of the exact same type.

In object construction, `__copy` is combined with `__init` to perform copy construction. For example,
```
var b : B = a
```
is replaced by the following statements
```
var b : B
b:__init()              --generated by compiler
A.methods.__copy(&a, &b)  --generated by compiler
```
If the right `__copy` method is not implemented but a user defined `__cast` metamethod exists that can cast one of the arguments to the correct type, then the cast is performed and then the relevant copy method is applied.

#### Array copy assignment / construction
If you have an array with an element type that is managed, then the compiler will schedule a function that loops over the entries in the array and copies the elements one-by-one.

### Move construction / assignment
If a `__copy` method is not implemented then resources are moved by default. So move-construction:
```
var b : B = a
```
is replaced by
```
var b : B
b:__init()                  --generated by compiler
A.methods.__move(&a, &b)    --generated by compiler
```
Similarly, move-assignment:
```
b = a
```
is simply replaced by
```
A.methods.__move(&a, &b)    --generated by compiler
```

> Althought the `__copy` enables custom behavior, the `__move` method is always auto-generated and does exactly what it is designed for: transfering ownership.

Author: The line in 185 is contrasting `__move` versus `__copy`. While `__copy` is user-defined, `__move` is auto-generated. When `__copy` is not implemented, assignments default to a move.

> Althought the `__copy` enables custom behavior, the `__move` method is always auto-generated and does exactly what it is designed for: transfering ownership.

Reviewer: Right, then I'd suggest a wording along the lines of:

> In contrast to `__copy`, which can be manually implemented (and thus customized) by the user, `__move` method is always auto-generated by the compiler. This permits moves to be performed with `memcpy` in all cases and thus they have predictable performance and implementation characteristics.

Or whatever rationale is appropriate. I think this explains some of my earlier confusion in a different comment.

> Althought the `__copy` enables custom behavior, the `__move` method is always auto-generated and does exactly what it is designed for: transfering ownership.

Author: great explanation. I will add it.

#### Array move assignment / construction
If you have an array with an element type that is managed, then the compiler will schedule a function that loops over the entries in the array and moves the elements one-by-one.

#### Avoiding unnecessary copies
At times, when `__copy` is implemented, it may be useful to force a move to avoid unnecessary copies. This can be achieved with the `__move__` compiler directive:
```
    b = a               -- `__copy` will be invoked
    b = __move__(a)     -- `__move` will be invoked
```

#### Avoiding ownership transfer

> Sometimes it's useful to get a bitcopy of an object without any ownership transfer. We call this a handle. This is especially useful in the context of meta-programming using Terra macros. Here is an example:

Reviewer: Ok, if I understand correctly this is basically a way to take something that may be an r-value and turn it into an l-value. Which presumably we need because we don't want to follow C++'s explosion of different value kinds.

I think it's a reasonable feature but I need to think more about how to name and explain it. Right now I think there's a risk of it being misunderstood and thus misused.

> Sometimes it's useful to get a bitcopy of an object without any ownership transfer. We call this a handle. This is especially useful in the context of meta-programming using Terra macros. Here is an example:

Author: The user does not hold a reference to the temporary, but actually the temporary itself. However, `__handle__` signals the compiler that there should not be a destructor call scheduled for it.

> Sometimes it's useful to get a bitcopy of an object without any ownership transfer. We call this a handle. This is especially useful in the context of meta-programming using Terra macros. Here is an example:

Author: It may be possible to perform the allocation of the temporary hidden from the user and return a reference. I am not sure how hard it is to implement it that way.

Use `__handle__` with caution and always check the generated code by compiling the macro within a function and using `printpretty()`.

### Object destruction
`__dtor` can be used to free heap memory
```
A.methods.__dtor(self : &A)
```
The implementation adds a deferred call to `__dtor ` near the end of a scope, right before a potential return statement, for all variables local to the current scope that are not returned. Hence, `__dtor` is tied to the lifetime of the object. For example, for a block of code the compiler would generate
```
do
    var x : A, y : A
    ...
    ...
    defer x:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    defer y:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
end
```
or in case of a terra function
```
terra foo(x : A)
    var y : A, z : A
    ...
    ...
    defer x:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    defer z:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    return y
end
Since `x` is passed by value it owns a resource and therefore needs to be destructed. Also note that destructors will be called in reverse order of object creation, that is, first-in-last-out. 

> ```

Author: That's correct.

#### Destructor calls and return statements in nested scopes

> In nested scopes with return statements all resources need to be cleaned up before the return. Consider the following contrived example. Note that deferred destructor calls are scheduled in order of object creation. When the stack is unwound in the return of the `if` block, first `f` is destroyed, then `e`, then `d`, etc.

Author: This example is solely about scheduling of the destructor calls. I am not sure I understand your point? Can you give an example of what you would like to see?

```
terra g(x : A)
    var a : A
    var b : A
    var k = 0
    while true do
        var c : A
        var d : A
        if k > 2 then
            var e : A
            var f : A
            defer c:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
            defer d:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
            defer e:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
            defer f:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
            break
        end
        var g : A
        var h : A
        k = k + 1
        defer c:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
        defer d:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
        defer g:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
        defer h:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    end
    defer x:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    defer a:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
    defer b:__dtor()    --generated by the compiler
end
```

#### Array destructors
If you have an array with an element type that is managed, then the compiler will schedule a destructor function that loops over the entries in the array and destructs the elements one-by-one.

## Compositional API's

> If a struct has fields or subfields that are managed types, but do not implement `__init`, `__copy` or `__dtor`, then the compiler will generate default methods that inductively call existing `__init`, `__copy` or `__dtor` methods for its fields and subfields. This enables compositional API's like `vector(vector(int))` or  `vector(string)`. This is implemented as an extension to *terralib.lua* in *lib/terralibext.t*.

Reviewer: I think subfields are implied by the induction?

```suggestion
If a struct has fields that are managed types, but do not implement `__init`, `__copy` or `__dtor`, then the compiler will generate default methods that inductively call existing `__init`, `__copy` or `__dtor` methods for its fields. This enables compositional APIs like `vector(vector(int))` or  `vector(string)`. This is implemented as an extension to `terralib.lua` in `lib/terralibext.t`.
```

## Examples

> The following files have been added to the terra testsuite:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following files have been added to the Terra testsuite:
```

| raii-initializers.t           | Tests explicit initializer implementation in RAII classes.                    |
| raii-integration-copy.t       | Integration tests of RAII classes with focus on value semantics.              |
| raii-integration-move.t       | Integration tests of RAII classes with focus on move semantics.               |
| raii-meta.t                   | Tests use of RAII objects in macros.                                          |
| raii-shared_ptr.t             | Validates RAII with `shared_ptr` for shared resource ownership.               |
| raii-unique_ptr.t             | Tests RAII with `unique_ptr` for unique resource ownership.                   |
| raii-offset_ptr.t             | Tests RAII with offset-based pointer implementations.                         |
| raii.t                        | General tests for core RAII principles and functionality.                     |
| fails/raii-tuple-default-copy.t | Checks if tuple assignment is prohibited for managed moveable types         |
| fails/raii-tuple-custom-copy.t | Checks if tuple assignment is prohibited for managed copyable types          |

> You can have a look there for some common code patterns. Useful, in particular, are the integration tests in 'raii-integration-copy.t' and 'raii-integration-move.t'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have a look there for some common code patterns. Useful, in particular, are the integration tests in `raii-integration-copy.t` and `raii-integration-move.t`.
```

## Current limitations

> * The implementation is not aware of when an actual heap allocation is made and therefore assumes that a managed variable always carries a heap resource. It is up to the programmer to properly initialize pointer variables to nil to avoid calling 'free' on uninitialized pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The implementation is not aware of when an actual heap allocation is made and therefore assumes that a managed variable always carries a heap resource. It is up to the programmer to properly initialize pointer variables to `nil` to avoid calling `free` on uninitialized pointers.
```

> * Destructors are called in reverse order of object definition, a 'var x : A' or 'var x = ...' statement. 

Reviewer: Not clear to me if this is how they *do* work or how they *should* work.

```suggestion
* Destructors are called in reverse order of object definition, a `var x : A` or `var x = ...` statement. 
```

Author: What's your question exactly?

* Currently, `__init` is used to fully initialize an object, in a copy- and move-construction. This is convenient but not optimal, since some fields will be assigned to twice.

> * Destructors are sometimes called even if the object has been initialized to nil. This is not optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Destructors are sometimes called even if the object has been initialized to `nil`. This is not optimal.
```
